# 2.10 Q&A

Q: What is the relationship between state values and returns?

A: The value of a state is the mean of the returns that can be obtained if the agent starts from that state.

Q: Why do we care about state values?

A: State values can be used to evaluate policies. In fact, optimal policies are defined based on state values. This point will become clearer in the next chapter.

Q: Why do we care about the Bellman equation?

A: The Bellman equation describes the relationships among the values of all states. It is the tool for analyzing state values.

Q: Why is the process of solving the Bellman equation called policy evaluation?

A: Solving the Bellman equation yields state values. Since state values can be used to evaluate a policy, solving the Bellman equation can be interpreted as evaluating the corresponding policy.

Q: Why do we need to study the matrix-vector form of the Bellman equation?

A: The Bellman equation refers to a set of linear equations established for all the states. To solve state values, we must put all the linear equations together. The matrix-vector form is a concise expression of these linear equations.

Q: What is the relationship between state values and action values?

A: On the one hand, a state value is the mean of the action values for that state. On the other hand, an action value relies on the values of the next states that the agent may transition to after taking the action.

Q: Why do we care about the values of the actions that a given policy cannot select?

A: Although a given policy cannot select some actions, this does not mean that these actions are not good. On the contrary, it is possible that the given policy is not good and misses the best action. To find better policies, we must keep exploring different actions even though some of them may not be selected by the given policy.
