# 5.3 MC Exploring Starts

We next extend the MC Basic algorithm to obtain another MC-based reinforcement learning algorithm that is slightly more complicated but more sample-efficient.

# 5.3.1 Utilizing samples more efficiently

An important aspect of MC-based reinforcement learning is how to use samples more efficiently. Specifically, suppose that we have an episode of samples obtained by following a policy $\pi$ :

$$
s _ {1} \xrightarrow {a _ {2}} s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {4}} s _ {1} \xrightarrow {a _ {2}} s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {3}} s _ {5} \xrightarrow {a _ {1}} \dots \tag {5.3}
$$

where the subscripts refer to the state or action indexes rather than time steps. Every time a state-action pair appears in an episode, it is called a visit of that state-action pair. Different strategies can be employed to utilize the visits.

The first and simplest strategy is to use the initial visit. That is, an episode is only used to estimate the action value of the initial state-action pair that the episode starts from. For the example in (5.3), the initial-visit strategy merely estimates the action value of $(s_1, a_2)$ . The MC Basic algorithm utilizes the initial-visit strategy. However, this strategy is not sample-efficient because the episode also visits many other state-action pairs such as $(s_2, a_4)$ , $(s_2, a_3)$ , and $(s_5, a_1)$ . These visits can also be used to estimate the corresponding action values. In particular, we can decompose the episode in (5.3) into multiple subepisodes:

$$
\begin{array}{l} s _ {1} \xrightarrow {a _ {2}} s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {4}} s _ {1} \xrightarrow {a _ {2}} s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {3}} s _ {5} \xrightarrow {a _ {1}} \ldots [ \mathrm {o r i g i n a l e p i s o d e} ] \\ s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {4}} s _ {1} \xrightarrow {a _ {2}} s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {3}} s _ {5} \xrightarrow {a _ {1}} \ldots [ \mathrm {s u b e p i s o d e s t a r t i n g f r o m} (s _ {2}, a _ {4}) ] \\ s _ {1} \xrightarrow {a _ {2}} s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {3}} s _ {5} \xrightarrow {a _ {1}} \dots \quad [ \mathrm {s u b e p i s o d e s t a r t i n g f r o m} (s _ {1}, a _ {2}) ] \\ s _ {2} \xrightarrow {a _ {3}} s _ {5} \xrightarrow {a _ {1}} \ldots [ \mathrm {s u b e p i s o d e s t a r t i n g f r o m} (s _ {2}, a _ {3}) ] \\ s _ {5} \xrightarrow {a _ {1}} \ldots [ \mathrm {s u b e p i s o d e s t a r t i n g f r o m} (s _ {5}, a _ {1}) ] \\ \end{array}
$$

The trajectory generated after the visit of a state-action pair can be viewed as a new episode. These new episodes can be used to estimate more action values. In this way, the samples in the episode can be utilized more efficiently.

Moreover, a state-action pair may be visited multiple times in an episode. For example, $(s_1, a_2)$ is visited twice in the episode in (5.3). If we only count the first-time visit, this is called a first-visit strategy. If we count every visit of a state-action pair, such a strategy is called every-visit [20].

In terms of sample usage efficiency, the every-visit strategy is the best. If an episode is sufficiently long such that it can visit all the state-action pairs many times, then this single episode may be sufficient for estimating all the action values using the every-visit strategy. However, the samples obtained by the every-visit strategy are correlated because the trajectory starting from the second visit is merely a subset of the trajectory starting from the first visit. Nevertheless, the correlation would not be strong if the two visits are far away from each other in the trajectory.

# 5.3.2 Updating policies more efficiently

Another aspect of MC-based reinforcement learning is when to update the policy. Two strategies are available.

The first strategy is, in the policy evaluation step, to collect all the episodes starting from the same state-action pair and then approximate the action value using the average return of these episodes. This strategy is adopted in the MC Basic algorithm.

Algorithm 5.2: MC Exploring Starts (an efficient variant of MC Basic)   
Initialization: Initial policy $\pi_0(a|s)$ and initial value $q(s,a)$ for all $(s,a)$ . Returns $(s,a) = 0$ and $\mathrm{Num}(s,a) = 0$ for all $(s,a)$ .  
Goal: Search for an optimal policy.  
For each episode, do  
Episode generation: Select a starting state-action pair $(s_0,a_0)$ and ensure that all pairs can be possibly selected (this is the exploring-starts condition). Following the current policy, generate an episode of length $T$ : $s_0,a_0,r_1,\ldots ,s_{T - 1},a_{T - 1},r_T$ . Initialization for each episode: $g\gets 0$ For each step of the episode, $t = T - 1,T - 2,\dots ,0$ do $g\gets \gamma g + r_{t + 1}$ Returns $(s_t,a_t)\gets \mathrm{Returns}(s_t,a_t) + g$ $\mathrm{Num}(s_t,a_t)\gets \mathrm{Num}(s_t,a_t) + 1$ Policy evaluation: $q(s_{t},a_{t})\gets \mathrm{Returns}(s_{t},a_{t}) / \mathrm{Num}(s_{t},a_{t})$ Policy improvement: $\pi (a|s_t) = 1$ if $a = \arg \max_a q(s_t,a)$ and $\pi (a|s_t) = 0$ otherwise

The drawback of this strategy is that the agent must wait until all the episodes have been collected before the estimate can be updated.

The second strategy, which can overcome this drawback, is to use the return of a single episode to approximate the corresponding action value. In this way, we can immediately obtain a rough estimate when we receive an episode. Then, the policy can be improved in an episode-by-episode fashion.

Since the return of a single episode cannot accurately approximate the corresponding action value, one may wonder whether the second strategy is good. In fact, this strategy falls into the scope of generalized policy iteration introduced in the last chapter. That is, we can still update the policy even if the value estimate is not sufficiently accurate.

# 5.3.3 Algorithm description

We can use the techniques introduced in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 to enhance the efficiency of the MC Basic algorithm. Then, a new algorithm called MC Exploring Starts can be obtained.

The details of MC Exploring Starts are given in Algorithm 5.2. This algorithm uses the every-visit strategy. Interestingly, when calculating the discounted return obtained by starting from each state-action pair, the procedure starts from the ending states and travels back to the starting state. Such techniques can make the algorithm more efficient, but it also makes the algorithm more complex. This is why the MC Basic algorithm,

which is free of such techniques, is introduced first to reveal the core idea of MC-based reinforcement learning.

The exploring starts condition requires sufficiently many episodes starting from every state-action pair. Only if every state-action pair is well explored, can we accurately estimate their action values (according to the law of large numbers) and hence successfully find optimal policies. Otherwise, if an action is not well explored, its action value may be inaccurately estimated, and this action may not be selected by the policy even though it is indeed the best action. Both MC Basic and MC Exploring Starts require this condition. However, this condition is difficult to meet in many applications, especially those involving physical interactions with environments. Can we remove the exploring starts requirement? The answer is yes, as shown in the next section.
