# 8.6 Q&A

Q: What is the difference between the tabular and function approximation methods?

A: One important difference is how a value is updated and retrieved.

How to retrieve a value: When the values are represented by a table, if we would like to retrieve a value, we can directly read the corresponding entry in the table. However, when the values are represented by a function, we need to input the state index $s$ into the function and calculate the function value. If the function is an artificial neural network, a forward prerogation process from the input to the output is needed.

How to update a value: When the values are represented by a table, if we would like to update one value, we can directly rewrite the corresponding entry in the table. However, when the values are represented by a function, we must update the function parameter to change the values indirectly.

Q: What are the advantages of the function approximation method over the tabular method?

A: Due to the way state values are retrieved, the function approximation method is more efficient in storage. In particular, while the tabular method needs to store $|\mathcal{S}|$ values, the function approximation method only needs to store a parameter vector whose dimension is usually much less than $|\mathcal{S}|$ .

Due to the way in which state values are updated, the function approximation method has another merit: its generalization ability is stronger than that of the tabular method. The reason is as follows. With the tabular method, updating one state value would not change the other state values. However, with the function approximation method, updating the function parameter affects the values of many states.

Therefore, the experience sample for one state can generalize to help estimate the values of other states.

Q: Can we unify the tabular and the function approximation methods?

A: Yes. The tabular method can be viewed as a special case of the function approximation method. The related details can be found in Box 8.2.

Q: What is the stationary distribution and why is it important?

A: The stationary distribution describes the long-term behavior of a Markov decision process. More specifically, after the agent executes a given policy for a sufficiently long period, the probability of the agent visiting a state can be described by this stationary distribution. More information can be found in Box 8.1.

The reason why this concept emerges in this chapter is that it is necessary for defining a valid objective function. In particular, the objective function involves the probability distribution of the states, which is usually selected as the stationary distribution. The stationary distribution is important not only for the value approximation method but also for the policy gradient method, which will be introduced in Chapter 9.

Q: What are the advantages and disadvantages of the linear function approximation method?

A: Linear function approximation is the simplest case whose theoretical properties can be thoroughly analyzed. However, the approximation ability of this method is limited. It is also nontrivial to select appropriate feature vectors for complex tasks. By contrast, artificial neural networks can be used to approximate values as black-box universal nonlinear approximators, which are more friendly to use. Nevertheless, it is still meaningful to study the linear case to better grasp the idea of the function approximation method. Moreover, the linear case is powerful in the sense that the tabular method can be viewed as a special linear case (Box 8.2).

Q: Why does deep Q-learning require experience replay?

A: The reason lies in the objective function in (8.37). In particular, to well define the objective function, we must specify the probability distributions of $S, A, R, S'$ . The distributions of $R$ and $S'$ are determined by the system model once $(S, A)$ is given. The simplest way to describe the distribution of the state-action pair $(S, A)$ is to assume it to be uniformly distributed. However, the state-action samples may not be uniformly distributed in practice since they are generated as a sequence by the behavior policy. It is necessary to break the correlation between the samples in the sequence to satisfy the assumption of uniform distribution. To do this, we can use the experience replay technique by uniformly drawing samples from the replay buffer. A benefit of experience replay is that each experience sample may be used multiple times, which can increase the data efficiency.

Q: Can tabular Q-learning use experience replay?

A: Although tabular Q-learning does not require experience replay, it can also use experience relay without encountering problems. That is because Q-learning has no requirements about how the samples are obtained due to its off-policy attribute. One benefit of using experience replay is that the samples can be used repeatedly and hence more efficiently.

Q: Why does deep Q-learning require two networks?

A: The fundamental reason is to simplify the calculation of the gradient of (8.37).

Specifically, the parameter $w$ appears not only in $\hat{q}(S, A, w)$ but also in $R + \gamma \max_{a \in \mathcal{A}(S')} \hat{q}(S', a, w)$ .

As a result, it is nontrivial to calculate the gradient with respect to $w$ . On the one hand, if we fix $w$ in $R + \gamma \max_{a \in \mathcal{A}(S')} \hat{q}(S', a, w)$ , the gradient can be easily calculated as shown in (8.38). This gradient suggests that two networks should be maintained. The main network's parameter is updated in every iteration. The target network's parameter is fixed within a certain period. On the other hand, the target network's parameter cannot be fixed forever. It should be updated every certain number of iterations.

Q: When an artificial neural network is used as a nonlinear function approximator, how should we update its parameter?

A: It must be noted that we should not directly update the parameter vector by using, for example, (8.36). Instead, we should follow the network training procedure to update the parameter. This procedure can be realized based on neural network training toolkits, which are currently mature and widely available.
